# Project: Data Lake with Spark

## Project Description

<p>sparkify, a music streaming startup is growing and need to move their warehouse to datatlake hosted in S3.Analytics team would make good use of these data in order to idetify trends and bring meaningful business ideas to increase userbase further and enhanace user experience.</p>

<p>Intent of this project is to to create a ETL pipleline for a data lake hosted in S3 by using the concepts learned in this course on spark and basic AWS S3. Below stpes needs to be performed:</p>
**1. Load data from S3 ( Refer to: Project Datasets) <br>
**2: process the data into analytics tables using Spark <br>
**3: load them back into S3 (Refer to Schema for Song Play Analysis) <br>


## Project Datasets

Here are the two datasets that reside in S3 with their links:

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. You have to be mindfull about the path otherwise files wont be picked up from the designated library and will end up with less data. Here are filepaths to two files in this dataset (follow pattern song_data/*/*/*/*.json) 
>song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
>song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
The log files are partitioned by year and month. You have to be mindfull about the path otherwise files wont be picked up from the designated library and will end up with less data. Here are filepaths to two files in this dataset (follow pattern log_data/*/*/*.json) 
>log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
>log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, below mentioned star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis need to be created. 
This includes the following tables.

#### Fact Table

> songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
> Columns: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

#### Dimension Tables

> users - users in the app
> Columns - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

> songs - songs in music database
> Columns - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

> artists - artists in music database
> Columns - artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

> time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
> Columns - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## <br>Data Lake to store extracted dimentional tables
>"s3://m489887-udacity-sparkify-data-lake-project/output/artists" <br>
>"s3://m489887-udacity-sparkify-data-lake-project/output/songs" <br>
>"s3://m489887-udacity-sparkify-data-lake-project/output/time" <br>
>"s3://m489887-udacity-sparkify-data-lake-project/output/users" <br>
>"s3://m489887-udacity-sparkify-data-lake-project/output/songplays"<br>


## <br>Project Files and configuration

**1. dl.cfg**                    Contains the Secret Key for ASW access<br>
**2. etl.py**                    Loading song data and log data from S3 to Spark, transforms data into a set of dimensional tables, then save the table back to S3 <br>
**3. README.md**                 Provides project info<br>
**4. Need spark(Localy) or can be executed directly on AWS EMR. Please be mindful about the required imports.

References:
**1. https://github.com/xingyazhou/udacity-data-lakes-with-spark/
**2. https://towardsdatascience.com/some-issues-when-building-an-aws-data-lake-using-spark-and-how-to-deal-with-these-issues-529ce246ba59
**3: https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/

    



